# Why I make carbon fibre guitars

January 2021

The musical instrument industry is a tiny niche and the most popular electric
guitar models are designs from the 1950's. Why bother?

It's interesting, fun, and I want to. The rest of this post is essentially a
retroactive justification of my feelings.

Before we talk about the material or the broader design principles we use at
<a href="https://www.rubato.guitars" class="text-blue-500 underline underline-offset-2 hover:underline-offset-4" target="_blank" >Rubato
Guitars</a>, I should explain my assessment of the current electric guitar
industry.

In short, it is: conservative, unable/afraid to move away from old instrument
designs, and tied to wood for sentimental reasons. This is sad. As far as
instruments go, the electric guitar is almost
brand-new<a href="#1" class="align-top text-xs text-stone-400">[1]</a>. In it's
heyday (the era of guitar heroes), there was a sense of innovation and progress,
now it's a lot of nostalgia and some snake-oil.

The way I see it, if the electric guitar were to be invented today there is
little chance it would be made out of wood. _Especially_ not the woods that are
commonplace in the industry. These are of a different time. Wood is heavy and
unreliable, it's primary redeeming factor is that it's
cheap<a href="#2" class="align-top text-xs text-stone-400">[2]</a>. It is so
susceptible to changes in the weather that a massive metal rod has to be
installed down the centre of a guitar's neck to fight the uncooperative
material. All this means no two wood electric guitars will feel the same or play
the same, even if they come off the line one after the other.

Guitarists have deemed this unreliability a good thing. If you try a bunch of
guitars you will eventually find "the one" and it will be magical. There are a
few problems with this. Firstly, this implies that there are a lot of guitars
being produced which are duds (or at least sub-par)---this is clearly
bad<a href="#3" class="align-top text-xs text-stone-400">[3]</a>. If they aren't
coming out right, then you find out what's causing the defects and fix it at the
source---especially if the thing you're selling is thousands of dollars. Rolex
don't send out a bunch of watches that don't keep time or have slightly skew
hands.

I actually think the luxury watch analogy here is quite appropriate. They're
nowhere near the best way to keep time, they make a big deal of their history,
and the enthusiasts are obsessive. Part of their world consists vintage watches
and historically accurate re-issues. But a far larger part of that world is
modern horology. This stays true to the "essence" of what the community sees as
a watch: springs and cogs. As long as they use springs and cogs, there are
plenty of enthusiasts happy for the makers to go wild with modern materials,
production processes and designs. Maybe they're trying to keep time as
best/elegantly as possible without digital assistance, maybe they just want new,
nice things, whatever---it's clear that they don't only want the same old thing
over and over again.

So for guitarists, the question is: what do you believe is the "essence" of an
electric guitar? I think it's something with strings and frets that you plug
into an amp to make noise. How critical is wood in this equation?

There will always be the vintage stalwarts. I think this is a good thing. BMW
doesn't look down on classic car enthusiasts, because classic cars are cool.
However, they don't base their new production lines on approaches they used in
the 60's. They'll take design inspiration from the old stuff, but they're not
going to use drum brakes.

Les Pauls and Strats are iconic. We love their sound and we want to be like our
guitar heroes. But, when we now don't have to, why should we inherit their
limitations?

---

<span id="1">[1]</span> It was invented by people only slightly older than my
grandparents. The piano's from 1700. The violin, 1500.

<span id="2">[2]</span> This is it's best defence.

<span id="3">[3]</span> As a manufacturer you aim for all the products you
produce to be good, if a lot of them aren't, something must be wrong.
